This repository includes all data and code associated with the following manuscript:

# Chemical bleaching severity determines uptake of heat-evolved Symbiodiniaceae in corals

**Authors**: Corinne E. Allen, Nadine M. Boulotte, Wing Yan Chan, Matthew R. Nitschke, & Madeleine J.H. van Oppen

**Journal**: Pending

**Link**: Pending

## Abstract

Coral reefs are increasingly threatened by marine heatwaves, driving efforts to enhance coral thermal resilience. One promising approach involves engineering coral symbioses by introducing heat-evolved (HE) algal symbionts into corals. To use this intervention with adult corals, the native symbiont community needs to be depleted, typically via chemical bleaching, prior to inoculation with HE symbionts. However, host recovery and community assembly dynamics in mildly bleached corals remain poorly understood. In this study, a dose-dependent chemical bleaching (CB) experiment was conducted using menthol and diuron (DCMU) to understand how different levels of CB impact host health and acquisition of HE symbionts. We monitored coral mortality, change in area, pigmentation, and photochemical efficiency through bleaching and twelve weeks of recovery and found that impacts on host health were proportional to bleaching level, although there were strong genotypic effects. Shuffling to the previously low abundance native *Durusdinium* was also proportional to CB treatment, and only fragments from the severe treatment experienced significant uptake of HE symbionts. Furthermore, significant uptake was not detected until 12 weeks post-deployment, suggesting delayed niche establishment and proliferation of these symbionts. Findings from this study provide insight into symbiont community assembly processes, informing the optimisation and scaling of symbiont engineering and manipulation interventions that enhance coral resilience.


## Repository contents

### Data
* **symportal_datasets**: Downloaded SymPortal datasets for all library runs
* **symportal_metadata**: Downloaded SymPortal metadata for all library runs
* **data/experimental_design.csv**: Metadata (treatments, genotypes, tanks, etc.) for all coral fragments included in experiment
* **data/deployment_design_final.csv**: Metadata for fragments from the experiment that were deployed in the field. NOTE: deployed corals have device labels, that are different from the plug labels in the experimental portion of the experiment. The last sampling timepoint (T3/T0_field) used the device labels.
* **data/mortality_plugs.csv**: List of all fragments that experienced total mortality during the experiment and the date they were recorded as such
* **data/mortality_summary.csv**: Number of fragments alive and dead each week for each treatment x colony_id combination
* **data/surface_area.csv**: 2D surface area measurements of all fragmnets at the beginning (t00) and end of the experiment (t14)
* **data/pam.csv**: Chlorophyll fluorescence data generated by WALZ DIVING-PAM (5mm fibre optic cable). The same fragments were followed through time, with measurements being taken on both tops and sides of the fragments.
* **data/reflectance.csv**: Red, Green, and Blue measurements from all fragments measured in ImageJ
* **data/sampling**: Fragments chosen for sampling at each of the sampling time points, including
  * Pre-bleaching (**pre_b.csv**): n = 5
  * Post-inoculation (**post_b.csv**): n=
  * 1 month post-inoculation (**postRI_1month_samples.csv**): n =
  * 3 months post-inoculation (**postRI_3month_samples.csv**) n = 2-15 fragments/genotype/treatment
* **data/SCF055_defined_2**: List of DIVs in the HE *Cladocopium proliferum* profile and their proportions. Averaged from 13 samples of pure culture across 5 library runs.
* **data/SCF086_defined_2**: List of DIVs in the HE *Durusdinium* profile and their proportions. Averaged from 11 samples of pure culture across 5 library runs.
* **data/SCF086_defined_2**: List of DIVs in the native *Durusdinium* profile and their proportions. Averaged from 21 samples of *Durusdinium*-dominated samples never exposed to inoculum with high reads (>10,000). 

  
### Analysis

* **analysis/bleaching_levels_code.Rmd**: includes all analyses within the manuscript, including:
  * Mortality
  * Change in area
  * Pigmentation/reflectance
  * Chlorophyll fluorescence (Fv/Fm)
  * Trait tradeoffs
  * Symbiont uptake
  * Overall symbiont community diversity
* **analysis/functions.R**: custom functions
* **analysis/inoc_pal_2.Rdata**: custom color palette for symbiont figures
